---
date: 2024-10-14
tags:
  - Doutoramento
  - Pensamentos
---
**Título**: A Monumentalização da Guerra Colonial Portuguesa: Análise da Estátua "Aos Heróis do Ultramar" em Coimbra e sua Influência na Memória Coletiva

**Resumo**: Este artigo investiga o papel da construção monumental na memória coletiva portuguesa acerca da Guerra Colonial Portuguesa (1961-74), tendo como objeto de estudo a estátua _Aos Heróis do Ultramar_, erguida em 1971 em Coimbra. Esta investigação elaborou uma abordagem com três métodos: (1) a interpretação iconográfica da estátua para identificar a mensagem que esta transmite; (2) a análise dos discursos públicos e eventos relacionados à estátua entre 2005 e 2024, para compreender como as elites locais e nacionais se relacionam com este; (3) a realização de quatro sessões de *focus group* com estudantes da Licenciatura em educação básica de uma escola superior próxima do monumento, para identificar qual é a percepção destes sobre a Guerra Colonial Portuguesa e a estátua.
Os resultados de cada método aplicado indicam que: (1) o monumento, construído pelo Estado Novo enquanto celebração do esforço de guerra, reproduz um imaginário colonial e racista, assente em valores lusotropicalistas; (2) as elites locais e nacionais cooptaram o monumento e seus significados dentro do discurso público com pouca ou nenhuma crítica; (3) os estudantes demonstraram críticas e resistências ao monumento discutido apenas ao serem informados de que este foi construído pelo Estado Novo - regime fascista português. 
A partir da combinação dos resultados, concluiu-se que o atual regime de memória da cidade de Coimbra sobre a Guerra Colonial portuguesa apresenta uma continuidade com a propaganda pró-guerra do Estado Novo. Além disso, durante a investigação, identificou-se um modo de discurso  nos participantes e nos discursos públicos sobre o conflito. Este constitui uma geografia imaginada do Ultramar e apaga as experiências e sofrimentos das populações então colonizadas antes e depois da Guerra Colonial Portuguesa. Esta pesquisa contribui para o entendimento do papel da monumentalização na preservação e transformação das memórias históricas no contexto pós-colonial português.


**Palavras-chave**: Guerra Colonial Portuguesa, monumentalização, memória coletiva, lusotropicalismo, memoryscapes.


This article investigates the role of monumental construction in the Portuguese collective memory regarding the Portuguese Colonial War (1961-74), taking as its object of study the statue _Aos Heróis do Ultramar_, erected in 1971 in Coimbra. This investigation developed an approach with three methods: (1) the iconographic interpretation of the statue to identify the message it conveys; (2) the analysis of public discourses and events related to the statue between 2005 and 2024, to understand how local and national elites relate to it; (3) holding four *focus group* sessions with undergraduate students in basic education from a higher school close to the monument, to identify their perception of the Portuguese Colonial War and the statue.
The results of each method applied indicate that: (1) the monument, built by the Estado Novo as a celebration of the war effort, reproduces a colonial and racist imaginary, based on Lusotropicalist values; (2) local and national elites have co-opted the monument and its meanings into public discourse with little or no criticism; (3) the students demonstrated criticism and resistance to the discussed monument only when they were informed that it was built by the Estado Novo - Portuguese fascist regime.
From the combination of results, it was concluded that the current memory regime of the city of Coimbra regarding the Portuguese Colonial War presents continuity with the pro-war propaganda of the Estado Novo. Furthermore, during the investigation, a mode of discourse was identified in the participants and in public discourses about the conflict. This constitutes an imagined geography of Overseas and erases the experiences and suffering of the then colonized populations before and after the Portuguese Colonial War. This research contributes to the understanding of the role of monumentalization in the preservation and transformation of historical memories in the Portuguese post-colonial context.



This article investigates the role of monumental construction in the Portuguese collective memory of the Portuguese Colonial War (1961-74),  taking as its object of study the statue _Aos Heróis do Ultramar_, erected in 1971 in Coimbra. This research used a three-method approach: (1) the iconographic interpretation of the statue to identify the message it conveys; (2) the analysis of public discourses and events related to the statue between 2005 and 2024, to understand how local and national elites relate to it; (3) four focus group sessions with undergraduate students in basic education from a university near the monument, to identify their perception of the Portuguese Colonial War and the statue.
The results of each method applied indicate that: (1) the monument, built by the Estado Novo as a celebration of the war effort, reproduces a colonial and racist imaginary, based on Lusotropicalist values; (2) the local and national elites co-opted the monument and its meanings within the public discourse with little or no criticism; (3) the students showed criticism and resistance to the monument discussed only when informed that it was built by the Estado Novo - the Portuguese fascist regime. 
By combining the results, this investigation concluded that the current mnemonic regime of Coimbra on the Portuguese Colonial War shows continuity with the pro-war propaganda of the Estado Novo. Furthermore, during the research, a mode of discourse was identified in the participants and in the public discourses on the conflict. This constitutes an imagined geography of the Overseas Territories and erases the experiences and suffering of the colonised populations before and after the War. This research contributes to the understanding of the role of monumentalisation in the preservation and transformation of historical memories in the Portuguese post-colonial context.




