---
date: 2024-09-29
tags:
---
# Coisas pra fazer 
- [x] Arrumar a cozinha 
- [x] Separar almoço de amanha
- [x] separar roupinhas
- [x] Colocar relógio pra carregar
- [x] FAzer candidatura 
- [x] Entregar candidatura
- [x] Ler texto do miguel

# Candidatura *IN SITU*
Hoje eu vou fazer a minha candidatura para o projeto: N SITU: Place-based
Innovation of Cultural and Creative Industries in Non-urban Areas”

The core defining aspect of IN SITU is the interlinking of research and practice through place-based IN SITU Labs, hubs for case studies in 6 non-urban regions across Europe, located in Portugal, Ireland, Iceland, Finland, Latvia, and Croatia. Involving both Europe-wide research and place-based experimentation, IN SITU will provide an in-depth knowledge of the direct and indirect effects, cross-sectoral connections and spillovers, innovative strategies and systems, and needs of CCI practitioners in non-urban areas. 
Complementary to this, the project will assess and advance the multi-level innovation and culture policy and planning frameworks that contextualise and can enable this work.

As atividades que se esperam de mim são: 
1. Manage and continually update the project website, social media channels, and other platforms for communication of the project and the non-urban cultural and creative ecosystems it investigates to the public.
2. Support for IN SITU promotion in all components of its activity.
3. Plan, design and organise communication and dissemination activities included in the workplan of the project, including a newsletter (each 6 months), press releases, a podcast series and events, among other planned items.
4. Lead the development of communication materials about the project and ensure they are regularly updated.
5. Design and develop digital and printable materials for promotion and dissemination of project activities and results to academic and non-academic audiences.
6. Contribute to the preparation of reports and the development of scientific production in the area. 
7. Working with the PI and Project Manager, contribute to strategies, the management of meetings, and communications with the IN SITU Outreach Partners (European and international).
8. Support the project networking efforts with other relevant initiatives, consortia, and European projects.
9. Develop and manage external contacts database.


Requisitos:
a) a letter of intent/motivation in English with the contest reference (CES/16/2024-BI-INSITU), e-mail and phone number;
b) detailed Curriculum Vitae;
c) copies of degree certificates (note: candidates must meet the eligibility conditions indicated in point k.);
d) copy of the enrolment in a master’s or PhD programme in the academic year 2024/2025 or copy of the enrolment in a non-academic course that is integrated in the pedagogical project of a higher education institution (note: candidates must meet the eligibility conditions indicated in point k.);
e) examples of previous writing, e.g., press release, essay/article

Critérios de Seleção:

1. Higher education in social sciences, with a preference for science communication studies, journalism, cultural studies, or similar field (10%);
2. Previous experience and knowledge in communication and dissemination of research activities;
management of social networks; development of promotion strategies for different audiences; design and management of platforms and digital content; use of communication tools (e.g., wordpress, mailchimp, graphic design software, and social media platforms); creation of multimedia resources; organisation and management of projects and events (40%);
3. Proficiency in English (25%);
4. Interest in developing research work within the scope of the project’s thematic areas (10%);
5. Training in research methodologies (10%);
6. Availability for national and international travel (5%)

Objetivos do Projeto
1. Strengthen non-urban CCIs in the EU
2. Advance inter-connection between innovation and cultural policy
3. Demonstrate and strengthen the capacity of CCIs to contribute to the well-being and sustainability of non-urban communities
4. Inform the CCI sector

Eu completei minha dissertação de mestrado em Sociologia na Faculdade de Economia, onde desenvolvi uma investigação entre as disciplinas de História e Sociologia Urbana e da Cultura sobre a memória urbanizada da Guerra Colonial Portuguesa. Esta foi aprovada com 19 valores. 

No âmbito a producão e gestão de conteúdo, tenho 4 anos de experiência em diversas frentes desse trabalho. Atuei como Diretor de Comunicação e Imagem de Diversas organizações estudantis e da sociedade civil. Fui Diretor Académico do Grupo de Estudos Brasileiros Maria Quitéria, onde planejei, coordenei e moderei módulos de estudo sobre Cultura, Política Económica e História das Ideias do Brasil e da América Latina.

Ainda no contexto do Grupo MQ, produzi e editei um conjunto de Podcasts realizados pelo grupo. 

Tenho também experiência na produção de conteúdos gráficos e de comunicação, nomeadamente posters, flyers, publicações para redes sociais e peças de comunicação por escrito e newsletters. 

Para além da concretização da minha dissertação de mestrado, minha experiência também integra a participação enquanto assistente de pesquisa e investigação no projeto "A Política e Seus Imaginários", do Professor Casimiro Ferreira, bem como no projeto "Apoio ao Combate à Corrupção em Moçambique".

Assim, em razão das minhas experiências e competências técnicas, meu contato e interesse pela temática do projeto e minha prévia experiência académica, acredito que eu seja um ótimo candidato para a vaga.

0/11/2023 – 27/06/2024 Coimbra, Portugal
POLITICAL ANALYST OBSERVATÓRIO PERMANENTE DA JUSTIÇA
- Development of policy issue reports
- Analysis of documentary data from EU and non-EU countries
- Contribution to the development of methodological approaches to identify and address social issues
01/05/2023 – 01/05/2023 Coimbra, Portugal
UNIVERSITY RESEARCH SUPPORT PROJETO - A POLÍTICA E SEUS IMAGINÁRIOS
- Analysis of academic literature and development of complex theoretical frameworks
- Examination of sociopolitical elements that define and constitute political imaginaries
- Contribution to the development of a transdisciplinary approach to understanding sociopolitical theories
07/2022 – 07/2023 Coimbra, Portugal
PRESIDENT SOCIEDADE DE DEBATES DA UNIVERSIDADE DE COIMBRA
	• Coordination of all sectors: I assumed the responsibility of overseeing and coordinating all sectors within the
	SDUC.
	• Project presentation: I took the lead in presenting innovative projects to the SDUC members, the university
	community, and external stakeholders.
	• Team management: As the president, I prioritized effective team management to optimize the SDUC's operations.
	• Communication with institutions and organizations: Serving as the primary liaison between the SDUC and external
	entities, I maintained regular communication and fostered partnerships with various institutions and
	organizations.
	• Strategic planning and decision-making: As the president, I played a pivotal role in strategic planning for the SDUC's future growth and success.
	• Public relations and advocacy: I undertook the responsibility of enhancing the SDUC's public image and promoting its activities and achievements.
06/2022 – 08/2023
ACADEMIC DIRECTOR GRUPO DE ESTUDOS BRASILEIROS MARIA QUITÉRIA
	• Oversee the operations of the student journal "Cadernos do Brasil," which aims to serve as a gateway for	bachelor's and master's students to engage in academic writing.
	• Develop Study Modules that bridge the gap between academic discussions and civil society.
	• Coordinate a team of seven individuals by effectively delegating tasks and assignments, taking into consideration each team member's strengths and skills, in order to optimize productivity and efficiency.
08/2019 – 09/2021
SOCIAL MEDIA MANAGER GRUPO DE ESTUDOS BRASILEIROS MARIA QUITÉRIA
	Manage the social media of the organization
	Design all the digital material
	Convert academic knowledge produced by the organization in engaging and impactful content for the social media
	Create newsletters for the member's communication
06/2020 – 06/2022
CONTENT AND PRODUCTION MANAGER QUITÉRIACAST
	Collectively elaborate interviews with relevant figures of Brazil, aiming the creation of a diverse and plural society, embracing values such as social justice and democracy.
	Produce the interviews with a team
	Edit the interviews
	Produce the related social media content 