---
date: 2024-10-24
tags:
---

There has been a veritable discursive explosion in recent years around the
concept of 'identity', at the same moment as it has been subjected to a
searching critique. How is this paradoxical development to be explained?
And where does it leave us with respect to the concept? The deconstruc
tion has been conducted within a variety of disciplinary areas, all of them,
in one way or another critical of the notion of an integral, originary and
unified identity. The critique of the self-sustaining subject at the centre of
post-Cartesian western metaphysics has been comprehensively ad
vanced in philosophy. The question of subjectivity and its unconscious
processes of formation has been developed within the discourse of a
psychoanalytically influenced feminism and cultural criticism. The end
lessly performative self has been advanced in celebratory variants of
postmodernism. Within the anti-essentialist critique of ethnic, racial and
national conceptions of cultural identity and the 'politics of location' some
adventurous theoretical conceptions have been sketched in their most
grounded forms. What, then, is the need for a further debate about
'identity'? Who needs it?
There are two ways of responding to the question. The first is to
observe something distinctive about the deconstructive critique to which
many of these essentialist concepts have been subjected. Unlike those
forms of critique which aim to supplant inadequate concepts with 'truer'
ones, or which aspire to the production of positive knowledge, the
deconstructive approach puts key concepts 'under erasure'. This in
dicates that they are no longer serviceable - 'good to think with' - in their
originary and unreconstructed form. But since they have not been
superseded dialectically, and there are no other, entirely different
concepts with which to replace them, there is nothing to do but to
continue to think with them - albeit now in their detotalized or
deconstructed forms, and no longer operating within the paradigm in
which they were originally generated (d. Hall, 1995). The line which
cancels them, paradoxically, permits them to go on being read. Derrida
has described this approach as thinking at the limit, as thinking in the
interval, a sort of double writing. 'By means of this double, and precisely
stratified, dislodged and dislodging writing, we must also mark the
Questions of Cultural Identity Introduction: Who Needs Identity? 3
interval between inversion, which brings low what was high, and the
irruptive emergence of a new 'concept', a concept that can no longer be
and never could be, included in the previous regime' (Derrida, 1981).
Identity is such a concept - operating 'under erasure' in the interval
between reversal and emergence; an idea which cannot be thought in the
old way, but without which certain key questions cannot be thought at
all.
A second kind of answer requires us to note where, in relation to what
set of problems, does the irreducibility of the concept, identity, emerge? I
think the answer here lies in its centrality to the question of agency and
politics. By politics, I mean both the significance in modern forms of
political movement of the signifier 'identity', its pivotal relationship to a
politics of location - but also the manifest difficulties and instabilities
which have characteristically affected all contemporary forms of 'identity
politics'. By 'agency' I express no desire whatsoever to return to an
unmediated and transparent notion of the subject or identity as the
centred author of social practice, or to restore an approach which 'places
its own point of view at the origin of all historicity - which, in short, leads
to a transcendental consciousness' (Foucault, 1970, p. xiv). I agree with
Foucault that what we require here is 'not a theory of the knowing
subject, but rather a theory of discursive practice'. However, I believe that
what this decentring requires - as the evolution of Foucault's work clearly
shows - is not an abandonment or abolition of 'the subject' but a
reconceptualization - thinking it in its new, displaced or decentred
position within the paradigm. It seems to be in the attempt to rearticulate
the relationship between subjects and. discursive practices that the
question of identity recurs - or rather, if one prefers to stress the process
of subjectification to discursive practices, and the politics of exclusion
which all such subjectification appears to entail, the question of identifi
cation.
Identification turns out to be one of the least well-understood concepts
- almost as tricky as, though preferable to, 'identity' itself; and certainly
no guarantee against the conceptual difficulties which have beset the
latter. It is drawing meanings from both the discursive and the psycho
analytic repertoire, without being limited to either. This semantic field is
too complex to unravel here, but it is useful at least to establish its
relevance to the task in hand indicatively. In common sense language,
identification is constructed on the back of a recognition of some common
origin or shared characteristics with another person or group, or with an
ideal, and with the natural closure of solidarity and allegiance established
on this foundation. In contrast with the 'naturalism' of this definition, the
discursive approach sees identification as a construction, a process never
completed - always 'in process'. It is not determined in the sense that it
can always be 'won' or 'lost', sustained or abandoned. Though not
without its determinate conditions of existence, including the material
and symbolic resources required to sustain it, identification is in the end
conditional, lodged in contingency. Once secured, it does not obliterate
difference. The total merging it suggests is, in fact, a fantasy of
incorporation. (Freud always spoke of it in relation to 'consuming the
other' as we shall see in a moment.) Identification is, then, a process of
articulation, a suturing, an over-determination not a subsumption. There
is always 'too much' or 'too little' - an over-determination or a lack, but
never a proper fit, a totality. Like all signifying practices, it is subject to the
'play', of differance. It obeys the logic of more-than-one. And since as a
process it operates across difference, it entails discursive work, the
binding and marking of symbolic boundaries, the production of 'frontier
effects'. It requires what is left outside, its constitutive outside, to
consolidate the process.
From its psychoanalytic usage, the concept of identification inherits a
rich semantic legacy. Freud calls it 'the earliest expression of an emotional
tie with another person' (Freud, 1921/1991) In the context of the Oedipus
complex, however, it takes the parental figures as both love-objects and
objects of rivalry, thereby inserting ambivalence into the very centre of
the process. 'Identification is, in fact, ambivalent from the very start'
(1921/1991: 134). In 'Mourning and Melancholia', it is not that which binds
one to an object that exists, but that which binds one to an abandoned
object-choice. It is, in the first instance, a 'moulding after the other' which
compensates for the loss of the libidinal pleasures of primal narcissism. It
is grounded in fantasy, in projection and idealization. Its object is as likely
to be the one that is hated as the one that is adored; and as often taken
back into the unconscious self as 'taking one out of oneself'. It is in
relation to identification that Freud elaborated the critical distinction
between 'being' and 'having' the other. 'It behaves like a derivative of the
first, oral phase of organization of the libido, in which the object that we
long for is assimilated by eating and is in that way annihilated as such'
(1921/1991: 135). 'Identifications viewed as a whole', Laplanche and
Pontalis (1985) note 'are in no way a coherent relational system. Demands
coexist within an agency like the super-ego, for instance, which are
diverse, conflicting and disorderly. Similarly, the ego-ideal is composed
of identifications with cultural ideals that are not necessarily harmonious'
(p.208).
I am not suggesting that all these connotations should be imported
wholesale and without translation into our thinking around 'identity',
but they are cited to indicate the novel repertoires of meaning with which
the term is now being inflected. The concept of identity deployed here is
therefore not an essentialist, but a strategic and positional one. That is to
say, directly contrary to what appears to be its settled semantic career,
this concept of identity does not signal that stable core of the self,
unfolding from beginning to end through all the vicissitudes of history
without change; the bit of the self which remains always-already 'the
same', identical to itself across time. Nor - if we translate this essentializ
ing conception to the stage of cultural identity -is it that 'collective or true
Questions of Cultural Identity
self hiding inside the many other, more superficial or artificially imposed
"selves" which a people with a shared history and ancestry hold in
common' (Hall, 1990) and which can stabilize, fix or guarantee an
unchanging 'oneness' or cultural belongingness underlying all the other
superficial differences. It accepts that identities are never unified and, in
late modern times, increasingly fragmented and fractured; never singular
but multiply constructed across different, often intersecting and antagon
istic, discourses, practices and positions. They are subject to a radical
historicization, and are constantly in the process of change and trans
formation. We need to situate the debates about identity within all those
historically specific developments and practices which have disturbed the
relatively 'settled' character of many populations and cultures, above all
in relation to the processes of globalization, which I would argue are
coterminous with modernity (Hall, 1996) and the processes of forced and
'free' migration which have become a global phenomenon of the so-called
'post-colonial' world. Though they seem to invoke an origin in a historical
past with which they continue to correspond, actually identities are about
questions of using the resources of history, language and culture in the
process of becoming rather than being: not 'who we are' or 'where we
came from', so much as what we might become, how we have been
represented and how that bears on how we might represent ourselves.
Identities are therefore constituted within, not outside representation.
They relate to the invention of tradition as much as to tradition itself,
which they oblige us to read not as an endless reiteration but as 'the
changing same' (Gilroy, 1994): not the so-called return to roots but a
coming-to-terms-with our 'routes'. They arise from the narrativization of
the self, but the necessarily fictional nature of this process in no way
undermines its discursive, material or political effectivity, even if the
belongingness, the 'suturing into the story' through which identities arise
is, partly, in the imaginary (as well as the symbolic) and therefore,
always, partly constructed in fantasy, or at least within a fantasmatic
field.
Precisely because identities are constructed within, not outside,
discourse, we need to understand them as produced in specific historical
and institutional sites within specific discursive formations and practices,
by specific enunciative strategies. Moreover, they emerge within the play
of specific modalities of power, and thus are more the product of the
marking of difference and exclusion, than they are the sign of an identical,
naturally-constituted unity - an 'identity' in its traditional meaning (that
is, an all-inclusive sameness, seamless, without internal differentiation).
Above all, and directly contrary to the form in which they are
constantly invoked, identities are constructed through, not outside,
difference. This entails the radically disturbing recognition that it is only
through the relation to the Other, the relation to what it is not, to precisely
what it lacks, to what has been called its constitutive outside that the
'positive' meaning of any term - and thus its 'identity' - can be
Introduction: Who Needs Identity?
constructed (Derrida, 1981; Laclau, 1990; Butler, 1993). Throughout their
careers, identities can function as points of identification and attachment
only because of their capacity to exclude, to leave out, to render 'outside',
abjected. Every identity has at its 'margin', an excess, something more.
The unity, the internal homogeneity, which the term identity treats as
foundational is not a natural, but a constructed form of closure, every
identity naming as its necessary, even if silenced and unspoken other,
that which it 'lacks'. Laclau (1990) argues powerfully and persuasively
that 'the constitution of a social identity is an act of power' since,
If ... an objectivity manages to partially affirm itself it is only by repressing that
which threatens it. Derrida has shown how an identity's constitution is always
based on excluding something and establishing a violent hierarchy between the
two resultant poles - man/woman, etc. What is peculiar to the second term is
thus reduced to the function of an accident as opposed to the essentiality of the
first. It is the same with the black-white relationship, in which white, of course,
is equivalent to 'human being'. 'Woman' and 'black' are thus 'marks' (i.e.
marked terms) in contrast to the unmarked terms of 'man' and 'white'. (Laclau,
1990: 33)
So the 'unities' which identities proclaim are, in fact, constructed within
the play of power and exclusion, and are the result, not of a natural and
inevitable or primordial totality but of the naturalized, overdetermined
process of 'closure' (Bhabha, 1994; Hall, 1993).
If 'identities' can only be read against the grain - that is to say,
specifically not as that which fixes the play of difference in a point of origin
and stability, but as that which is constructed in or through differance and
is constantly destabilized by what it leaves out, then how can we
understand its meaning and how can we theorize its emergence? Avtar
Brah (1992: 143), in her important article on 'Difference, diversity and
differentiation', raises an important series of questions which these new
ways of conceptualizing identity have posed:
Fanon notwithstanding, much work is yet to be undertaken on the subject of
how the racialized 'other' is constituted in the psychic domain. How is
post-colonial gendered and racialized subjectivity to be analyzed? Does the
privileging of 'sexual difference' and early childhood in psychoanalysis limit its
explanatory value in helping us to understand the psychic dimensions of social
phenomena such as racism? How do the 'symbolic order' and the social order
articulate in the formation of the subject? In other words, how is the link
between social and psychic reality to be theorized?' (1992: 142.)
What follows is an attemptto begin to respond to this critical but troubling
set of questions.
In some recent work on this topic, I have made an appropriation of the
term identity which is certainly not Widely shared and may not be well
understood. I use 'identity' to refer to the meeting point, the point of
suture, between on the one hand the discourses and practices which
attempt to 'interpellate', speak to us or hail us into place as the social
subjects of particular discourses, and on the other hand, the processes
7b Questions of ClIltural Identity
which produce subjectivities, which construct us as subjects which can
bl' 'spoken'. Identities are thus points of temporary attachment to the
subject positions which discursive practices construct for us (see Hall,
1'i95). They are the result of a successful articulation or 'chaining' of the
subject into the flow of the discourse, what Stephen Heath, in his path
breaking essay on 'Suture' called 'an intersection' (1981:106). 'A theory
of ideology must begin not from the subject but as an account of su
turing effects, the effecting of the join of the subject in structures of
meaning.' Identities are, as it were, the positions which the subject is
obliged to take up while always 'knowing' (the language of conscious
ness here betrays us) that they are representations, that representation
is always constructed across a 'lack', across a division, from the place of
the Other, and thus can never be adequate ~ identical - to the subject
processes which are invested in them. The notion that an effective su
turing of the subject to a subject-position requires, not only that the
subject is 'hailed', but that the subject invests in the position, means that
sLlturing has to be thought of as an articulation, rather than a one-sided
process, and that in turn places identification, if not identities, firmly on
the theoretical agenda.
The references to the term which describes the hailing of the subject
by discourse - interpellation - remind us that this debate has a signifi
cant and uncompleted pre-history in the arguments sparked off by
Althusser's 'Ideological state apparatuses' essay (1971). This essay intro
duced the notion of interpellation, and the speculary structure of ideol
ogy in an attempt to circumvent the economism and reductionism of the
classical Marxist theory of ideology, and to bring together within one
explanatory framework both the materialist function of ideology in re
producing the social relations of production (Marxism) and (through its
borrowings from Lacan) the symbolic function of ideology in the consti
tution of subjects. Michele Barrett, in her recent discussion of this
debate, has gone a considerable way to demonstrating 'the profoundly
divided and contradictory nature of the argument Althusser was begin
ning to make' (Barrett, 1991: 96; see also Hall, 1985: 102: 'The two sides of
the difficult problem of ideology were fractured in that essay and, ever
since, have been assigned to different poles'). Nevertheless, the ISAs
essay, as it came to be known, has turned out to be a highly significant,
l'ven if not successful, moment in the debate. Jacqueline Rose, for ex
ilmple, has argued in Sexuality in the Field of Vision (1986), that 'the
question of identity - how it is constituted and maintained - is therefore
Ihe central issue through which psychoanalysis enters the political
field'.
This is one reason why Lacanian psychoanalysis came into English intellectual
life, via Althusser's concept of ideology, through the two paths of feminism
and the analysis of film (a fact often used to discredit all three). Feminism
bpc3use the issue of how indivlduals recognize themselves as male or female,
the demand that they do so, seems to stand in such fundamental relation to
Introduction: Who Needs Identity>
the forms of inequality and subordination which it is feminism's objective to
change. Film because its power as an ideological apparatus rests on the
mechanisms of identification and sexual fantasy which we all seem tD
participate in, but which - outside the cinema - are fDr the most part only ever
admitted on the cDuch. If ideology is effective, it is because it wDrks at the most
rudimentary levels of psychic identity and the drives. (RDse, 1986: 5)
However, if we are not to fall directly froman econDmistic reductionism
into a psychoanalytic one, we need to add that, if ideology is effective, it is
because it works at both 'the rudimentary levels of psychic identity and the
drives' mid at the level of the discursive formation and practices which
constitute the social field; and that it is in the articulation of these
mutually constitutive but not identical fields that the real conceptual
problems lie. The term identity - which arises precisely at the point of
intersection between them - is thus the site of the difficulty. It is worth
adding that we are unlikely ever to be able to square up these two
constituents as equivalents - the unconscious itself acting as the bar or cut
between them which makes it 'the site of a perpetual postponement or
deferral of equivalence' (Hall, 1995) but which cannot, for that reason, be
given up.
Heath's essay (1981) reminds us that it was Michael Pecheux who tried
to develop an account of discourse within the Althusserian perspective,
and who in effect, registered the unbridgeable gap between the first and
the second halves of Althusser's essay in terms of 'the heavy absence of a
conceptual articulation elaborated between ideology and the Ill/conscious,
(quoted in Heath, 1981: 106). Pecheux tried 'to describe with reference to
the mechanisms of the setting in position of its subjects' (Heath,
1981: 101-2), using the Foucauldian notion of discursive formation as that
which 'determines what can and must be said'. As Heath put Pecheux's
argument:
Individuals are constituted as subjects through the discursive fonnation, a
process of subjection in which [draWing on Althusser's Joan from Lacan
concerning the speculary character Df the constitution of subjectivity] the
individual is identified as subject to the discursive formatiDn in a structure Df
misrecognition (the subject thus presented as the sDurce of the meanings of
which it is an effect). Interpellation names the mechanism of this structure of
misrecognition, effectively the term of the subject in the dIscursive and the
ideDlogical, the point of their correspondence (1981: 101-2).
Such 'correspondence', however, remained troublingly unresolved.
Interpellation, though it continues to be used as a general way of
describing the 'summoning into place' of the subject, was subjected to
Hirst's famous critique. It depended, Hirst argued, on a recognition
which, in effect, the subject would have been required to have the
capacity to perform before it had been constituted, within discourse, as a
subject. 'This something which is not a subject must already have the
faculties necessary to support the recognition that will constitute it as a
subject' (Hirst, 1979: 65). This argument has proved very persuasive to
8 Questions of Cultural Identity Introduction: Who Needs Identity? 9
many of Althusser's subsequent readers, in effect bringing the whole ~ the zones of bodily activity and the apparatus of sensation, pleasqre and
field of investigation to an untimely halt. f*. pain must be already 'in play' in however embryonic a form in order for
The critique was certainly a formidable one, but the halting of all further ~ any relation of any kind to be established with the external world. There is
~
inquiry at this point may turn out to have been premature. Hirst's critique
was effective in showing that all the mechanisms which constituted the
subject in discourse as an interpellation, (through the speculary structure
of misrecognition modelled on the Lacanian mirror phase), were in
danger of presupposing an already constituted subject. However, since
no one proposed to renounce the idea of the subject as constituted in
discourse as an effect, it still remained to be shown by what mechanism
which was not vulnerable to the charge of presupposition this consti
tution could be achieved. The problem was postponed, not resolved.
Some of the difficuties, at least, seemed to arise from accepting too much
at face value, and without qualification, Lacan's somewhat sensationalist
proposition that everything constitutive of the subject not only happens
through this mechanism of the resolution of the Oedipal crisis, but
happens in the same moment. The 'resolution' of the Oedipal crisis, in the
over-condensed language of the Lacanian hot-gospellers, was identical
with, and occurred through the equivalent mechanism as, the submission
to the Law of the Father, the consolidation of sexual difference, the entry
into language, the formation of the unconscious as well- after Althusser
as the recruitment into the patriarchal ideologies of late capitalist western
societies! The more complex notion of a subject-in-process is lost in these
polemical condensations and hypothetically aligned equivalences. (Is the
subject racialized, nationalized and constituted as a late-liberal entre
preneurial subject in this moment too?)
Hirst, too, seems to have assumed what Michele Barrett calls' Althuss
er's Lacan'. However, as he puts it, 'the complex and hazardous process
of formation of a human adult from "a small animal" does not necessarily
correspond to Althusser's mechanism of ideology ... unless the Child.
remains in Lacan's mirror phase, or unless we fill the child's cradle with
anthropological assumptions' (Hirst, 1979). His response to this is
somewhat perfunctory. 'I have no quarrel with Children, and I do not
wish to pronounce them blind, deaf or dumb, merely to deny that they
posses the capacities of philosophical subjects, that they have the attributes
of "knowing" subjects independent of their formation and training as
social beings.' What is at issue here is the capacity for self-recognition. But
it is an unwarrantable assumption to make, that 'recognition' is a purely
cognitive let alone 'philosophical' attribute, and unlikely that it should
appear in the child at one fell swoop, in a before/after fashion. The stakes
here seem, unaccountably, to have been pitched very high indeed. It
hardly requires us to endow the individual 'small animal' with the full
philosophical apparatus to account for why it may have the capacity to
'misrecognize' itself in the look from the place of the other which is all we
require to set the passage between the Imaginary and the Symbolic in
motion in Lacan's terms. After all, following Freud, the basic cathexing of
already a relation to a source of pleasure - the relation to the Mother in thei Imaginary - so there must be already something which is capable of
I
i
I
~ 'recognizing' what pleasure is. Lacan himself noted in his essay on 'The
Mirror Stage' that 'The child, at an age when he is for a time, however
short, outdone by the chimpanzee in instrumental intelligence, can
nevertheless already recognize his own image in a mirror.' What is more,
the critique seems to be pitched in a rather binary, before/after, either/or
logical form. The mirror stage is not the beginning of something, but the
I
interruption - the loss, the lack, the division - which initiates the process
I that 'founds' the sexually differentiated subject (and the unconscious)
~ and this depends not alone on the instantaneous formation of some
internal cognitive capacity, but on the dislocating rupture of the look from
the place of the Other. For Lacan, however, this is already a fantasy - the
I very image which places the child divides its identity into two. Further
more, that moment only has meaning in relation to the supporting
presence and the look of the mother who guarantees its reality for the
! child. Peter Osborne notes (1995) that in The Field Of The Other Lacan
(1977) describes the 'parent holding him up before the mirror', with the
child looking towards the Mother for confirmation, the child seeing her as
I a 'reference point ... not his ego ideal but his ideal ego' (p. 257). This
argument, Osborne suggests, 'exploits the indeterminacy inherent in the
discrepancy between the temporality of Lacan's description ofthe child's
encounter with its bodily image in the mirror as a "stage" and the
punctuality of his depiction of it as a scene, the dramatic point of which is
restricted to the relations between two "characters" alone: the child and
its bodily image'. However, as Osborne says, either it represents a critical
addition to the 'mirror stage' argument - in which case, why is it not
developed? Or it introduces a different logic whose implications remain
unaddressed in Lacan's subsequent work.
The notion that nothing of the subject is there until the Oedipal drama
is an exaggerated reading of Lacan. The assertion that subjectivity is not
fully constituted until the Oedipal crisis has been 'resolved' does not
require a blank screen, tabula rasa, or a before/after conception of the
subject, initiated by a sort of coup de thNUre, even if - as Hirst rightly noted
- it leaves unsettled the problematic relationship between 'the individual'
and the subject. (What is the individual 'small animal' that is not yet a
subject?).
One could add that Lacan's is only one of the many accounts of the
formation of subjectivity which takes account of unconscious psychic
processes and the relation to the other, and the debate may look different
now that the 'Lacanian deluge' is somewhat receding and in the absence
of the early powerful impulsion in that direction which we were given by
Althusser's text. In his thoughtful recent discussion of the Hegelian
11
,.
~jo (luestions of Cultural Identity
"Or,iil" "i thb ('lllll'ppl of 'recognition' referred to above, Peter Osborne
fl.,". rlll<lIl"II .. i<:an for 'the way in which the child's relation to the image
i', "1,,;,,1,,1;/,,,1 by being abstracted from the context of its relations to
"\bp!,,, (I'Mlicularly, the mother)', while being made ontologically consti
f!lliv.' "I 'tlw symbolic matrix in which the I is precipitated in a primordial
"mn ,.' and considers several other variants (Kristeva, Jessica Ben
j<ln,in, l.aplanche) which are not so confined within the alienated
!II i'.I't'l·ognition of the Lacanian scenario. These are useful pointers
[>pyond the impasse in which this discussion, in the wake of 'Althusser's
I.dl'''''', has left us, with the threads of the psychic and the discursive
spinning loose in our hands.
Foucault, I would argue, also approaches the impasse with which
Hirst's critique of Althusser leaves us, but so to speak from the opposite
direction. Ruthlessly attacking 'the great myth of interiority', and driven
both by his critque of humanism and the philosophy of consciousness,
and by his negative reading of psychoanalysis, Foucault also undertakes a
radical historicization of the category of the subject. The subject is
produced 'as an effect' through and within discourse, within specific
discursive formations, and has no existence, and certainly no tran
scendental continuity or identity from one subject position to another. In
his 'archaeological' work (Madness and Civilization, The Birth of the Clinic,
The Order of Thin;ss, The Archaeology of Knowledge), discourses construct
subject positions through their rules of formation and 'modalities of
enunciation'. PowerfUlly compelling and original as these works are, the
criticism levelled against them in this respect at least seems justified. They
offer a formal account of the construction of subject positions within
discourse while revealing little about why it is that certain individuals
occupy some subject positions rather than others. By neglecting to
analyse how the social positions of individuals interact with the construc
tion of certain 'empty' discursive subject positions, Foucault reinscribes
an antinomy between subject positions and the individuals who occupy
them. Thus his archaeology provides a critical, but one-dimensional,
formal account of the subject of discourse. Discursive subject positions
become a priori categories which individuals seem to occupy in an
unproblematic fashion. (McNay, 1994: 76-7). McNay cites Brown and
Cousins's key observation that Foucault tends here to elide 'subject
positions of a statement with individual capacities to fill them' (Brown
and Cousins, 1980: 272) - thus coming up against the very difficulty which
Althusser failed to resolve, by a different route.
The critical shift in Foucault's work from an archaeological to a
genealogical method does many things to render more concrete the
somewhat 'empty formalism' of the earlier work, especially in the
powerful ways in which power, which was missing from the more formal
account of discourse, is now centrally reintroduced and the exciting
possibilities opened up by Foucault's discussion of the double-sided
character of subjection/subjectification (assujettisement). Moreover, the
centring of questions of power, and the notion that discourse itself is a
regulative and regulated formation, entry into which is 'determined by
and constitutive of the power relations that permeate the social realm'
(McNay, 1994: 87), brings Foucault's conception of the discursive for
mation closer to some of the classical questions which Althusser tried to
address through the concept of 'ideology' - shorn, of course, of its class
reductionism, economistic and truth-claiming overtones.
In the area of the theorization of the subject and identity, however,
certain problems remain. One implication of the new conceptions of
power elaborated in this body of work is the radical 'deconstruction' of
the body, the last residue or hiding place of 'Man', and its 'reconstruction'
in terms of its historical, genealogical and discursive formations. The
body is constructed by, shaped and reshaped by the intersection of a
series of disciplinary discursive practices. Genealogy's task, Foucault
proclaims, 'is to expose the body totally imprinted by history and the
processes of history's destruction of the body' (1984: 63). While we can
accept this, with its radically 'constructivist' implications (the body be
comes infinitely malleable and contingent) I am not sure we can or ought
to go as far as his proposition that 'Nothing in man - not even his body - is
sufficiently stable to serve as a basis for self-recognition or for under
standing other men.' This is not because the body is such a stable and true
referent for self-understanding, but because, though this may be a 'misre
cognition', it is precisely how the body has served to function as the signifier
of the condensation of subjectivities in the individual and this function cannot
simply be dismissed because, as Foucault effectively shows, it is not true.
Further, my own feeling is that, despite Foucault's disclaimers, his
invocation of the body as the point of application of a variety of disciplinary
practices tends to lend this theory of disciplinary regulation a sort of
'displaced or misplaced concreteness' - a residual materiality - and in this
way operates discursively to 'resolve' or appear to resolve the unspecified
relationship between the subject, the individual and the body. To put it
crudely, it pins back together or 'sutures' those things which the theory of
the discursive production of subjects, if taken to its limits, would irretrie
vably fracture and disperse. I think 'the body' has acquired a totemic
value in post-Foucauldian work precisely because of this talismanic
status. It is almost the only trace we have left in Foucault's work of a
'transcendental signifier'.
The more well-established critique, however, has to do with the prob
. lem which Foucault encounters with theorizing resistance within the
theory of power he deploys in Discipline and Punisl! and The History of
Sexuality; the entirely self-policing conception of the subject which
emerges from the disciplinary, confessional and pastoral modalities of
power discussed there, and the absence of any attention to what might in
any way interrupt, prevent or disturb the smooth insertion of individuals
into the subject positions constructed by these discourses. The sub
mission of the body through 'the soul' to the normalizing regimes of truth
12 13Questions of Cultural Identity Introduction: Who Needs Identity?
look for the forms and modalities of the relation to self by which theconstitutes a powerful way of rethinking the body's so-called 'materiality'
individual constitutes and recognizes himself qua subject.' Foucault, of(which has been productively taken up by Nikolas Rose, and the 'govern
course, would not commit anything so vulgar as actually to deploy thementality' school, as well as, in a different mode, by Judith Butler in Bodies
term 'identity', but I think, with 'the relation to self' and the constitutionThat Matter, 1993). But it is hard not to take Foucault's own formulation
and recognition of 'himself' (sic) qua subject we are approachingseriously, with all the difficulties it brings in its train: namely, that the
something of the territory which, in the terms established earlier, belongssubjects which are constructed in this way are 'docile bodies'. There is no
to the problematic of 'identity'.theorized account of how or why bodies should not always-far-ever turn This is not the place to trace through the many productive insightsup, in place, at the right time (exactly the point from which the classical
is body' (McNay, 1994: 104.) subject, some interior mechanisms of assent to the rule, as well as its
which flow from Foucault's analysis of the truth-games, the elaboration ofMarxist theory of ideology started to unravel, and the very difficulty
ethical work, of the regimes of self-regulation and self-fashioning, of thewhich Althusser rein scribed when he normatively defined the function of
'technologies of the self' involved in the constitution of the desiringideology as 'to reproduce the social relations of production'). Further
subject. There is certainly no single switch to 'agency', to intention andmore, there is no theorization of the psychic mechanism or interior
volition, here (though there are, very centrally, the practices of freedomprocesses by which these automatic 'interpellations' might be produced,
which prevent this subject from ever being simply a docile sexualizedor ~ more significantly - fail or be resisted or negotiated. Powerful and
body).productive as this work undoubtedly is, then, it remains the case that
But there is the production of self as an object in the world, the practiceshere 'Foucault steps too easily from describing disciplinary power as a
tendency within modern forms of social control, to positing disciplinary of self-constitution, recognition and reflection, the relation to the rule,
alongside the scrupulous attention to normative regulation, and thepower as a fully installed monolithic force which saturates all social
constraints of the rules without which no 'subjectification' is produced.relations. This leads to an overestimation of the efficacy of disciplinary
This is a significant advance, since it addresses for the first time inpower and to an impoverished understanding of the individual which
Foucault's major work the existence of some interior landscape of thecannot account for experiences that fall outside the realm of the "docile"
objectively disciplining force, which saves the account from the 'beThat this became obvious to Foucault, even if it is still refused as a
haviourism' and objectivism which threatens certain parts of Disciplinecritique by many of his followers, is apparent from the further and
and Punish. Often, in this work, the ethics and practices of the self aredistinctive shift in his work marked by the later (and incomplete) volumes
most fully described by Foucault as an 'aesthetics of existence', aof his so-called 'History of Sexuality' (The Use of Pleasure, 1987; The Care of
deliberate stylization of daily life; and its technologies are most effectivelythe Self, 1988, and as far as we can gather, the unpublished - and from the
demonstrated in the practices of self-production, in specific modes ofpoint of view of the critique just passed, the critical - volume on 'The
conduct, in what we have come from later work to recognize as a kind ofPerversions'). For here, without moving very far from his insigh tful work
performativity.on the productive character of normative regulation (no subjects outside
What I think we can see here, then, is Foucault being pushed, by thethe Law, as Judith Butler puts it), he tacitly recognizes that it is not
scrupulous rigour of his own thinking, through a series of conceptualenough for the Law to summon, discipline, produce and regulate, but
shifts at different stages in his work, towards a recognition that, since thethere must also be the corresponding production of a response (and thus
decentring of the subject is not the destruction of the subject, and sincethe capacity and apparatus of subjectivity) from the side of the subject. In
the 'centring' of discursive practice cannot work without the constitutionthe critical Introduction to The Use of Pleasure Foucault lists what by now
of subjects, the theoretical work cannot be fully accomplished withoutwe would expect of his work ~ 'the correlation between fields of know
complementing the account of discursive and disciplinary regulationledge. types of normativity and forms of subjectivity in particular cul
tures' - but now critically adds
the practices by which individuals were led to focus attention on themselves, to
decipher, recognize and acknowledge themselves as subjects of desire, bring
ing into play between themselves and themselves a certain relationship that
with an account of the practices of subjective self-constitution. It has
never been enough - in Marx, in Althusser, in Foucault - to elaborate a
theory of how individuals are summoned into place in the discursive
structures. lt has always, also, required an account of how subjects are
constituted; and in this work, Foucault has gone a considerable way in
showing this, in reference to historically-specific discursive practices,
allows them to discover, in desire, the truth oftheir being, be it natural or fallen.
In short, with this genealogy, the idea was to investigate how individuals were
led to practice, on themselves and on others, a hermeneutics of desire. (1987: 5)
Foucault describes this - correctly, in our view - as 'a third shift, in
normative self-regulation and technologies of the self. The question
which remains is whether we also require to, as it were, close the gap
between the two: that is to say, a theory of what the mechanisms are byorder to analyze what is termed "the subject". It seemed appropriate to which individuals as subjects identify (or do not identify) with the 'positions' to which they are summoned; as well as how they fashion, sty
lize, produce and 'perform' these positions, and why they never do so
completely, for once and all time, and some never do, or are in a con
stant, agonistic process of struggling with, resisting, negotiating and ac
commodating the normative or regulative rules with which they
confront and regulate themselves. In short, what remains is the require
ment to think this relation of subject to discursive formations as an articu
lation (all articulations are properly relations of 'no necessary
correspondence', Le. founded on that contingency which 'reactivates
the historical' cf. Laclau, 1990: 35).
It is therefore all the more fascinating that, when finally Foucault does
make the move in this direction (in work which was then tragically cut
short), he was prevented, of course, from going to one of the principal
sources of thinking about this neglected aspect - namely, psychoanaly
sis; prevented from moving in that direction by his own critique of it as
simply another network of disciplinary power relations. What he pro
duces instead is a discursive phenomenology of the subject (drawing per
haps on earlier sources and influences whose importance for him have
been somewhat underplayed) and a genealogy of the technologies of the
self. But it is a phenomenology which is in danger of being overwhelmed
by an overemphasis on intentionality - precisely because it cannot
engage with the unconscious. For good or ill, that door was already fore
closed.
Fortunately it has not remained so. In Gender Trouble (1990) and more
especially in Bodies That Matter (1993), Judith Butler has taken up,
through her concern with 'the discursive limits of "sex'" and with the
politics of feminism, the complex transactions between the subject, the
body and identity, through the drawing together in one analytic frame
work insights drawn from a Foucauldian and a psychoanalytic perspec
tive. Adopting the position that the subject is discursively constructed
and that there is no subject before or outside the Law, Butler develops a
rigorously argued case that
sex is, from the start, normative; it is what Foucault has called a 'regulatory
ideal'. In this sense, then, sex not only functions as a norm, but is part of a
regulatory practice that produces (through the repetition or iteration of a norm
which is without origin) the bodies it governs, that is, whose regulatory force
is made clear as a kind of productive power, the power to produce - demar
cate, circulate, differentiate - the bodies it controls ... 'sex' is an ideal con
struct which is forcibly materialized through time. (Butler, 1993: 1)
Materialization here is rethought as an effect of power. The view that
the subject is produced in the course of its materialization is strongly
grounded in a performative theory of language and the subject, but per
formativity is shorn of its associations with volition, choice and inten
tionality and (against some of the misreadings of Gender Trouble) re-read
'not as the act by which a subject brings into being what she/he names
G
i~ Introduction: Who Needs Identity? 15
~
~
i
but rather as that reiterative power of discourse to produce the phen
omena that it regulates and constrains' (Butler, 1993: 2).
The decisive shift, from the viewpoint of the argument being de
I veloped here, however, is 'a linking of this process of "assuming" a sex
with the question of identification, and with the discursive means by which
the heterosexual imperative enables certain sexed identifications and
~
forecloses and/or disavows other identifications' (Butler, 1993: 5). This
j
!
I
I( centring of the question of identification, together with the problematic of
the subject which 'assumes a sex', opens up a critical and reflexive
dialogue in Butler's work between Foucault and psychoanalysis which is
enormously productive. It is true that Butler does not provide an
elaborate theoretical meta-argument for the way the two perspectives, or
the relation between the discursive and the psychic, are 'thought'
I together in her text beyond a suggestive indication: 'There may be a way
to subject psychoanalysis to a Foucauldian redescription even as Foucault
himself refused that possibility.' At any rate
this text accepts as a point of departure Foucault's notion that regulatory power
I
I
~ produces the subjects it controls, that power is not only imposed externally but
works as the regulatory and normative means by which subjects are formed.
The return to psychoanalysis, then, is guided by the question of how certain
regulatory norms form a 'sexed' subject in terms that establish the indis
tinguishability of psychic and bodily formation. (1993: 23)
However, Butler's relevance to the argument is made all the more
pertinent because it is developed in the context of the discussion of
I gender and sexuality, framed by feminism, and so is directly recurrent
I
~
I
both to the questions of identity and identity politics, and to the questions
which Avtar Brah's work posed earlier about the paradigmatic function of
sexual difference in relation to other axes of exclusion. Here Butler makes
i a powerful case that all identities operate through exclusion, through the
discursive construction of a constitutive outside and the production of
abjected and marginalized subjects, apparently outside the field of the
symbolic, the representable - 'the production of an "outside", a domain
of intelligible effects' (1993: 22) - which then returns to trouble and
unsettle the foreclosures which we prematurely call 'identities'. She
deploys this argument with effect in relation to the sexualizing and the
racializing of the subject - an argument which requires to be developed if
the constitution of subjects in and through the normalizing regulatory
effects of racial discourse is to acquire the theoretical development
hitherto reserved for gender and sexuality (though, of course, her most
well-worked example is in relation to the production of these fOnTIS of
sexual abjection and lived unintelligibility usually 'normalized' as patho
logical or perverse).i As James Souter (1995) has pointed out, 'Butler's internal critique of
feminist identity politics and its foundationalist premises questions the
adequacy of a representational politics whose basis is the presumed
universality and unity of its subject - a seamless category of women.'
1716 Questions of Cultural Identity
Paradoxically, as in all other identities treated politically in a foundational
manner, this identity 'is based on excluding "different" women ... and
by normatively prioritizing heterosexual relations as the basis for feminist
politics'. This 'unity', Souter argues, is a 'fictive unity', 'produced and re
strained by the very structures of power through which emancipation is
sought'. Significantly, however, as Souter also argues, this does not lead
Butler to argue that all notions of identity should therefore be abandoned
because they are theoretically flawed. Indeed, she takes the speculary
structure of identification as a critical part of her argument. But she ac
knowledges that such an argument does suggest 'the necessary limits of
identity politics'.
In this sense, identifications belong to the imaginary; they are phantasmatic
efforts of alignment, loyalty, ambiguous and cross-corporeal cohabitations,
they unsettle the I; they are the sedimentation of the 'we' in the constitution of
any I, the structuring presentof alterity in the very formulation of the I. Identifi
cations are never fully and finally made; they are incessantly reconstituted,
and, as such, are subject to the volatile logic of iterability. They are that which is
constantly marshalled, consolidated, retrenched, contested and, on occasion,
compelled to give way. (1993: 105)
The effort, now, to think the question of the distinctiveness of the logic
within which the radalized and ethnidzed body is constituted discur
sively, through the regulatory normative ideal of a 'compulsive Eurocen
trism' (for want of a different word), cannot be simply grafted on to the
arguments briefly sketched above. But they have received an enormous
and original impetus from this tangled and unconcluded argument,
which demonstrates beyond the shadow of a doubt that the question, and
the theorization, of identity is a matter of considerable political signifi
cance, and is only likely to be advanced when both the necessity and the
'impossibility' of identities, and the suturing of the psychic and the dis
cursive in their constitution, are fully and unambiguously acknowledged.

References

Althusser, L. (1971) Lenin and Philosophy alld Other Essays, London: New Left Books.
Barrett, M (1991) The Polilics of Trtllh, Cambridge: Polity.
Bhabha, H. (1994) 'The Other Question', in The Location Of Culture, London: Routledge.
BTah, A. (1992) 'Difference, diversity and differentiation', in J. Donald and A. Rattansi (cds),
r<.nce, CII/turrand Difference, London: Sage (126-45).
Brown, B. and Cousins, M. (1980) 'The linguistic fault', Economy and Society, 9(3).
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trol/ble, London: Routledge.
BUller,). (1993) Bodies That Matter, London: Routledge.
Derrida, J. (198]) Positions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foucault, M. (1970) The Order of Things, London: Tavistock.
Foucault, M. (1972) The Archaeology of Knowledge, London: Tavistock.
Foucault, M. (1977) Disciplinca/1d Punish, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (19B1) TIle History of Sexuality Volume I, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (1987) The Use of Pleasure, Harmundsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (1988) Tlte Care of the Setf, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
I Introduction: Who Needs Identity?
Foucault, M. (1984) 'Nietzsche, genealogy, history', in P. Rabinow (ed.), The .Foucault
Reader, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud,S (192111991) Group psychology and the analysis of the ego, in Civilizatioll, Society and
Religion, Vol. 12 Selected Works, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gilroy, P. (1994) The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double COllsciousness, London: Verso.
Hall, S. (1985) 'Sjgnification, representation and ideology: Althusser and the post structuralist debates', Crifical Studies in Mass Communimtion, 2(2).
Hall, S. (1990) 'Cultural identity and diaspora', in ). Rutherford (ed.), Identity, London:
Lawrence & Wishart.
Hall, S. (1993) 'Cultural idennty in quesnon', in 5. Hall, D. Held and T, McGrew (eds),
Modernity and its Fuilires, Cambridge: Polity
Hall, S. (1995) 'Fantasy, identity, politics', in E. Carter, ). Donald and ). Squites (eds),
Cultural Remix: Theories of Polilics and the Popular, London: Lawrence & Wishart
Hall, S. (1996) 'When was the post-colonia!", in L. Curti and I. Chambers (eds), Tlte
Post-Colollial in Questioll, London: Routledge.
Heath, S. (1981) Questions of Cit/ema, Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Hirst, P. (1979) 011 Law and Ideology, Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Ladau, E. (1990) New Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time, London: Verso.
I Lacan,). (1977) Ecnts, London: Tavistock.
Lacan,). (1977) The Four FUlldamelltal Concepts o{ PsycilOanalvslS, London: Hogarth Press.
Laplanche, ). and Pontalis, ).-B. (1985) The Lollguage of Psycltoanalysis, London: Hogarth
Press.
McNay, L. (1994) Foucault: A Critical Introductioll, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Osborne, P. (1995) The Politics o{Time, London: Verso.
Rose,). (1986) Sexuality ill the Field of Visioll, London: Verso.
Souter, J. (1995) 'From Gellder Trouble to Bodies That Maffer', unpublished manuscri