---
date: 2025-02-25
hora: 13:35
tags:
---




# Coisas
- [ ] Academia
- [ ] Tomar remédio
- [ ] Tomar Creatina
- [ ] Bel
	- [ ] **https://letterboxd.com/film/the-seven-kittens/ **


**##### Day 1: Introduction to Python and Jupyter Notebook

You will learn how to operate Jupyter Notebooks, through Google Collab. You will cover different data types in Python, loops, and conditional statements.

_Homework: Set of programming games._

##### Day 2: Data collection I – Web scraping

Python is a popular language to extract data from the internet. You will learn how to extract data from semi-structured websites and save the results into .xlsx and .csv files.

_Homework: Scraper for a pre-defined website._

##### Day 3: Data analysis I – Intro to data cleaning, analysis and nested data structures

Data cleaning is one of the most challenging parts of a data scientist's work. During this session, you will learn how to extract relevant information from messy data and create data structures that are efficient to use.

_Homework: Write functions – combine loops and conditions._

##### Day 4: Data analysis II – Data analysis with Pandas and data visualisation

A picture is worth a thousand words. Besides introducing Python's most popular data analysis toolkits (Pandas, Matplotlib, Seaborn), you will learn how to convey the findings of your analysis effectively by creating appealing and scientifically valid visualisations. You will work in groups to analyse a pre-defined database, then present your findings to the class.

_Homework: Exploratory data analysis with visualisations on a pre-defined data set._

##### Day 5: Data analysis II – Statistical modelling

How to conduct statistical modelling in Python. The focus will be on the two most popular libraries:

- **Statsmodels:** Great for regressions and statistical tests.
- **SciPy:** Performs machine learning.

You'll also learn about PCA and freely available data sets you might choose for your post-class assignment.**