---
date: 2024-12-13
hora: 11:06
tags:
---


# Coisas
- [x] Pegar um caderninho novo
- [ ] colocar a imagem recovery 2.4 do e os
- [x] almoçar na cantina 
- [x] encontrar bel
- [x] ir trabalhandinho
- [x] falar com o luciano
- [ ] responder camila
- [ ] Mandar mensagem para a inês
	- [ ] Olá Inês! Tudo bem?
	      Eu tenho bastante interesse por investigação sobre rap e hip-hop, por isso já li algumas coisas que podem interessar para o seu trabalho de Memória. O Otávio Raposo escreve muito sobre a vivência de jovens periféricos e a presença do rap e hip-hop nessa identidade. Eu gosto particularmente do artigo https://journals.openedition.org/spp/300 . Para além disso, sobre a história desses géneros musicais, o livro Hip-Hop Tuga, do Ricardo Farinha muito interessante. Espero que ajude :)


porra
tomara que eu receba hoje

Michel Rolph Trouillot

Silencing the past - texto que fala sobre a chimera

# Trabalho
- [ ] [European Comission. 5](#_Toc184053153)
- [ ] [Citizens’ engagement and participation (F) 5](#_Toc184053154)
- [ ] [Networks of Towns  (F) 6](#_Toc184053155)
- [ ] [Call for proposals for 3-year framework partnership agreements to support European networks, civil society organisations active at EU level and European think tanks in the areas of Union values  7](#_Toc184053156)
- [ ] [Just Transition Mechanism (JTM) (F) 13](#_Toc184053157)
- [ ] [Call for Proposals. 13](#_Toc184053158)
- [ ] [StandICT.eu 2026 - 7th Open Call 13](#_Toc184053159)
- [ ] [Fourth REINFORCING Open Call on “Responsible Digitalization”. 14](#_Toc184053160)
- [x] [Call for proposals for action grants to support transnational projects on judicial training covering civil law, criminal law or fundamental rights (F) 15](#_Toc184053161
- [ ] [Citizens’ engagement and participation (F) 18](#_Toc184053162)
- [ ] [Call for proposals for action grants to promote judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters (F) 19](#_Toc184053163
- [ ] [Strengthen the capacities of the General Inspectorate for Migration for the implementation of the migration management and asylum legislation in line with EU acquis. 22](#_Toc184053164)
- [ ] [Civil Society Organisation (CSO) Thematic Programme in Indonesia. 22](#_Toc184053165)
- [ ] [Suport to the Public Security Directorate to Fight Against Organised Crime. 23](#_Toc184053166)
- [ ] [Advisory services and network to counterdisinformation and foreign information manipulation and interference (FIMI)* (F) 25](#_Toc184053167)
- [ ] [Preparing the EU for future enlargement: challenges and opportunities* (F) 26](#_Toc184053168)
- [ ] [Open strategic autonomy, economic and research security in EU foreign policy* (F) 27](#_Toc184053169)
- [ ] [The autocratic appeal: nature, drivers and strategies* (F) 29](#_Toc184053170)
- [ ] [Economic inequalities and their impact on democracy* (F) 30](#_Toc184053171)
- [ ] [The role of civic and citizenship education for strengthening civic and democratic participation and support for common European values* (F) 31](#_Toc184053172)
- [ ] [The role of civic and citizenship education for strengthening civic and democratic participation and support for common European values* (F) 32](#_Toc184053173)
- [ ] [Independence of the judiciary as an aspect of rule of law compliance* (F) 33](#_Toc184053174)
- [ ] [Calls for tenders. 35](#_Toc184053175)
- [ ] [Expert Support Platform for Resilience (Support measures) 35](#_Toc184053176)
- [ ] [Facility on Justice in Conflict and Transition III 36](#_Toc184053177)
- [ ] [COST – European Cooperation in Science & Tecnology. 37](#_Toc184053178)
- [ ] [OPEN CALL FOR PROPOSALS – COLLECTION OC-2025-1. 37](#_Toc184053179)
- [ ] [EURODAD.. 39](#_Toc184053180)
- [ ] [Call for sub-grant proposals undr the ‘Connecting the Dots’ EU DEAR project 39](#_Toc184053181)
- [ ] [European Research Council 40](#_Toc184053182)
- [ ] [ERC Consolidator Grants. 40](#_Toc184053183)
- [ ] [ERC Proof of Concept Grants. 41](#_Toc184053184)
- [ ] [William T. Grant Foundation. 42](#_Toc184053185)
- [ ] [Research Grants on Reducing Inequality. 42](#_Toc184053186)
- [ ] [NATO Public Diplomacy Division. 42](#_Toc184053187)
- [ ] [Societal Resilience Grants 2025. 42](#_Toc184053188)
- [ ] [The Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs of the U.S. Department of State  44](#_Toc184053189
- [ ] [Advancing Legal Reasoning, Writing, Practice and Professionalism in Bosnia and Herzegovina  44](#_Toc184053190
- [ ] [USAID.. 44](#_Toc184053191)
- [ ] [Human Rights Activity for Pakistan USAID.. 44](#_Toc184053192)
- [ ] [Transforming the International Humanitarian Data Ecosystem.. 45](#_Toc184053193)
- [ ] [Justice, Rights, and Security Annual Program Statement 46](#_Toc184053194)
- [ ] [USAID El Salvador and Central America Regional Mission (ES-CAM) Annual Program Statement (APS) 47](#_Toc184053195
- [ ] [UNDP. 47](#_Toc184053196)
- [ ] [Responsible Business and Access to Justice. 47](#_Toc184053197)
- [ ] [UNOPS. 48](#_Toc184053198)
- [ ] [Consultancy Services for Provision of Baseline study, Data collection and Analysis in Cap-Haitien and Les Cayes, Haïti 48](#_Toc184053199)
- [ ] [Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia. 49](#_Toc184053200)
- [ ] [ERC-PT A-Projects. 49](#_Toc184053201)
- [ ] [ERC-PT Careers. 49](#_Toc184053202)
- [ ] [H. M. International Development Funding U. K. 50](#_Toc184053203)
- [ ] [Humanitarian action and responsible artificial intelligence (AI) 50](#_Toc184053204)
- [ ] [American Association of Law Libraries. 51](#_Toc184053205)
- [ ] [AALL Research Fund: An Endowment Established by LexisNexis. 51](#_Toc184053206)
- [ ] [Migration Partnership Facility. 51](#_Toc184053207)
- [ ] [Support to the EU’s migration priorities with partner countries. 51](#_Toc184053208)
- [ ] [Support to the implementation of projects and interventions aligned to the new EU Talent Partnerships  53](#_Toc184053209)
- [ ] [European Union Agency For Asylum.. 53](#_Toc184053210)
- [ ] [Research and analysis of jurisprudence on international protection and registration in the EUAA Case Law Database (Asylum case law collection) 54](#_Toc184053211)
- [ ] [Instituto Camões. 54](#_Toc184053212)
- [ ] [Apoio à organização de Congressos, Colóquios, Conferências, Seminários e Estudos 2025  54](#_Toc184053213)
- [ ] [ONU.. 56](#_Toc184053214)
- [ ] [United Nations Democracy Fund(F) 56](#_Toc184053215)
- [ ] [Independent Social Research Foundation. 58](#_Toc184053216)
- [ ] [Fleible Grants for Small Groups (F) 58](#_Toc184053217)
- [ ] [World Bank Group. 59](#_Toc184053218)
- [ ] [Review of South Africa’s Special Economic Zones Framework. 59](#_Toc184053219)
- [ ] [Tabela Síntese. 60](#_Toc184053220)

