---
date: 2024-10-22
tags:
---

# Coisas para fazer

- [x] Mandar mensagem sobre a candidatura
- [x] imprimir letras
- [x] Escrever coisas do artigo
- [x] Ir na peça da Bel
- [x] Lavar rooupa 
- [x] Fazer tofu
- [x] Terminar de ler the implicated subject
- [x] Começar a ler o texto do boaventura
- [ ] organizar textos do kobo
- [ ] entregar coisinhas pra bel
- [ ] tentar falar com o girio

# thíasos

- [ ] Luz amarela
- [ ] Bel fofinha
- [ ] Senhor doutor - risadinha Martinho
- [ ] Gabriel bonto
- [ ] Consequentemente, não o possui - ai risadinha
- [ ] Luz na entrada do jovem Sócrates - MT bom
- [ ] Jovem bel Sócrates meio fora da luz
- [ ] Tapinha no Aristófanes
- [ ] Faltou um pouquinho de presença
- [ ] Transição mais legal de volta pro presente(passado
- [ ] Alcibíades μισά κιλό παρακαλούμε
- [ ] Ο πανό ταωα φοδα



Mostrar a biografia deste men pro luciano
Twalib Mbarak joined the Kenya Army in 1984 as a cadet and was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in 1985. He served in the military for fifteen years and undertook several assignments as an Infantry Officer and in the field of Military Intelligence. He also served as a United Nations Military Observer in Western Sahara under United Nations Mission for Western Sahara (MINURSO), and was awarded a United Nations Peace Keeping Medal. In 1999, Mbarak retired from the military having attained the rank of Major and joined the former National Security Intelligence Service, NSIS (Currently National Intelligence Service, NIS). He undertook several assignments including Head of Intelligence Analysis, and Senior Instructor at the National Intelligence Academy. He is credited with training and mentoring some of the top intelligence officers in Kenya. In 2006, Mbarak joined the Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission, KACC as a Principal Officer - Intelligence and played a key role in creating the Intelligence Department which is in charge of undercover operations. In 2010, Mbarak left KACC to join Kenya Electricity Generating Company, KenGen, as the Security & Integrity Manager. He was the first Chairman of the Association of Corporate Industrial Security Management Professionals, ACISMP. He is also a member of the American Society for Industrial Security, ASIS and the first person from East & Central Africa to attain the Certified Security Management Professional, CSMP from the International Security Management Institute, United Kingdom. Mbarak is accredited with mentoring many security professionals in the corporate and critical infrastructure security. On 11th January 2019, Mbarak was appointed as the Secretary/Chief Executive Officer of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission for a six-year term after a successful and rigorous interview by the Public Service Commission followed by a Parliamentary Vetting and approval by His Excellency the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta. In November 2021, Mbarak was appointed as a member of the Executive Committee for the International Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities, IAACA. Mbarak’s life in the military, intelligence and corporate worlds has given him opportunities to undertake several courses in combat intelligence, security intelligence, strategic intelligence, investigations, corporate security and security of critical infrastructure. He has undertaken these courses in Kenya, USA, United Kingdom, Germany, Israel and South Africa. He holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Political Science and Sociology and Masters in Armed Conflict & Peace Studies from the University of Nairobi. On 12th December 2023, Mbarak was awarded **Moran of the Order of the Golden Heart (M.G.H.)** by H.E President William Ruto during Jamhuri day celebrations.