---
date: 2024-10-30
tags:
---

# Coisa
- [x] Passar na papelaria 
- [x] Terminar relatório
- [x] Enviar pra marina
- [x] começar a organizar informações para próximo documento
- [ ] terapia
- [ ] rever apresentação com a bel
- [ ] Colocar livro do miguel na mochila
- [ ] bege e o dia do X


Mandar email pra Coco Norén

Dear Professor Coco Norén,  
  

You probably won't remember me, but at the preparations for Jul po Upplands 2021 we spent quite some time chatting and cutting an endless amount of kale.  
  

At the time I was in the third year of my bachelors degree. Now, after quite some years I've just finished my master's degree on the monumentalization of colonial memory in Europe and I'm looking for a PhD position.  
  

My erasmus semester at UU was truly amazing, for that I would love to come back to study at it. However, from what I've seen on the open Phd positions at UU of the past two or three months, there has been very little vacancies at social sciences. Is that really the case? Or there are other means where social science positions are mentioned.  
  

I think maybe this is not directly under your jurisdiction, but since I had a great time chatting with you (and cutting kale) I thought it might be good to ask you, also due to your work on linguistics. My phd project is to investigate how certain modes of discurse perpetuate or contest the colonial past in southern europe. 
  

Thanks in advance,  

Gabriel


angeline.rutazana@judiciary.gov.rw
Greetings Angéline RUTAZANA , the Inspector General of Courts of Rwanda,

  

  

I am currently developing an investigation on the judicial system of Rwanda and I was wondering if the judicial inspectors have any guide or manual to orient their field work during the inspections. If they happen to have, I would be very gratefull if you coul share it with me.  

  

Thanks in advance.